From the New York Times, [music] I'm
Rachel Abrams and this is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> For the first time in nearly a decade,
President Trump will meet with China's
[music] President Xi Jinping in Beijing.
The meeting comes as Trump struggles to
extract himself [music] from the war
with Iran and must now face off against
China, the biggest threat to the US's
dominance on everything from technology
[music] to trade.
Today, my colleague David Sanger
explains what's likely to come of this
meeting and more pressingly, [music]
what will not.
>> [music]
>> It's Wednesday, [music] May 13th.
>> Hey guys, can you hear me?
>> David, we can hear you. Where are you
right now?
>> Good, good, good. I'm uh
Uh I'm in my hotel in Beijing.
I just arrived with several of my
Washington Bureau colleagues and we are
all preparing for the president arriving
for his first trip to China in the
second term. Uh he'll get in on
Wednesday night and meet Xi Jinping the
next morning and part of Friday before
he just turns around and goes right back
home.
>> [snorts]
>> Okay, so now that you're Beijing, can
you set the scene for us a little bit,
David? Like what is the significance of
this meeting between President Trump and
Xi Jinping?
>> Well, as initially conceived, Rachel,
this was going to be the first of a
series of meetings this year in an
effort by the president to have
something of a rapprochement with the
Chinese after many, many years of
tension.
Last time the president was here was
2017 and it was a very different
situation.
The president was treated with all the
pageantry that the Chinese do very well.
>> President Xi, I want to thank you for
that incredible welcoming ceremony.
>> He had just been elected president to
the surprise of China and the world and
perhaps themselves.
>> Today, I discussed with President Xi the
chronic imbalance in our relationship
as it pertains to trade.
>> He was just beginning to think about how
China correlated with his economic
policies and his defense policies.
>> The United States is committed to
protecting the intellectual property of
our companies and providing a level
playing field.
>> And was going to focus on China's rise
as a major power.
>> In the coming months and years, I look
forward to building an even stronger
relationship
between our two countries, China
and the United States of America.
>> But this time, he arrives under the
cloud of the Iran conflict. You'll
remember he was supposed to come here in
April and put it off.
And did so, I think fairly convinced
that by mid-May Iran would have already
capitulated. And now instead, he shows
up with Iran resisting,
with other world leaders like Chancellor
Merkel of Germany contending that Iran
has humiliated the United States, and
with the Chinese themselves a bit
mystified about why the US was having
such a hard time opening up a body of
waters such as the Strait of Hormuz, or
defeating a kind of second or third rate
power in their mind, like Iran.
And of course, all summits are about
optics, and well, I'm sure there will be
all the
pomp and ceremony that goes with these,
the fact of the matter is, he comes into
this summit looking a bit weakened.
>> Okay, so I understand that Donald Trump
is walking into these meetings much
weaker than in 2017, but as for the
meeting itself, what do we know, if
anything, about what they're actually
going to be discussing?
>> Well, we don't know a huge amount right
now, but the obvious in any summit that
involves President Trump is that you
begin with the trade megalomaniac
relationships.
And there is almost always a series of
big purchases by China to be announced,
and potential business deals, and
memorandums of understanding, some of
which will come to fruition, and some of
which will not. But these are all below
hanging fruit
of the relationship. I mean, this is
what Donald Trump would do in any big
summit meeting. And in some ways, those
may be the easier of the issues to
resolve, which isn't to say that any of
them are easy.
>> Well, can we dive into that a little bit
more? Like, when you say low hanging
fruit, trade, business, what are we
talking about exactly?
>> Well, Rachel, this is Donald Trump, and
his idea of a summit is to emerge with a
bunch of business deals, even if they
don't fundamentally change the nature of
the relationship. And he set this one up
just that way. And so, you'll hear a lot
about the three B's: beef, beans, and
Boeing.
>> Why beans, beef, and Boeing?
>> Well, these are three big, distinctly
American exports. The Chinese have
always bought American soybeans,
although they think they're overpriced.
They've long been dependent on Boeing,
although now they're building some very
good aircraft of their own. And beef,
well, they're trying to start up their
own beef industry as well, but they're
still buying some specialty American
beef.
These are always the low-hanging fruit
of these summits because China needs to
buy some of this anyway, and the
president wants to be able to go out and
describe something that is an immediate
deliverable to the American people.
>> Right. The president doesn't need to fly
halfway across the world to negotiate
something that China was just going to
buy anyway.
>> I'm sure that you will hear many
announcements and the president will
declare that these were the biggest
purchases ever, but they are
fundamentally commodities. And that's
where the two countries do business most
easily.
>> But, you know, one thing that I did not
hear you discuss in your discussion of
the three B's, David, was a pretty big T
that we've been talking about on the
show a lot, and that is tariffs. Where
does that fit into all of this?
>> Well, obviously tariffs are a huge issue
for the Chinese. China's been a big
target of Trump's tariff regime, and I'm
sure that it will dominate a lot of the
discussion.
But the fact of the matter is the
Chinese were able to get President Trump
to back down some last year when in
retaliation they cut off rare earths and
magnets and so forth to the US to
demonstrate that they too have a bit of
leverage here. And then came the Supreme
Court decision, which forced the US to
pay back some of the tariffs that have
already been collected. And now a trade
court decision is going after President
Trump's ability to impose a 10% tariff
on every country.
So, I think that Xi Jinping probably
feels like he's already won half of his
argument before he starts.
Now, there are some tariffs on specific
Chinese products that certainly are a
big concern to them. And here the
biggest example is Chinese cars.
You know, the Chinese during the
president's first term exported about a
million cars a year.
This past year they've exported around
the world 7 million
except to the United States where they
were barred chiefly by Joe Biden who put
a 100% tariff on Chinese cars and that's
a big source of complaint on the part of
the Chinese.
>> Okay, so China is going to want to push
to get these cars into the US. Do we
expect a deal?
>> No.
We do not because I think everybody
recognizes that China's car production
capacity is posing a considerable threat
to the American car makers just as Japan
and did decades ago.
>> [music]
>> But I think what's worth remembering
here Rachel is
these are the immediate trade tensions
[music] that take place between
countries all the time with our
adversaries, with our allies.
But what's frustrating sometimes around
these summit meetings is that we all
know there are much more fundamental
divides between the two countries.
Divides that go to the heart of the
question of who will be the dominant
economic power, the dominant military
power, [music]
the dominant technological power for the
next number of decades.
And it's not clear whether any of those
core issues in the relationship will
come up at least [music] in direct form.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> So David, talk to us about those
fundamental divides that are both at the
heart of the battle for dominance
between these two countries and also
potentially unlikely to come up in the
meeting this week.
>> Well, it's no secret that for the past
10 years
the US and China have been engaged in
what sometimes looks like a bit of a
death struggle, right? Xi Jinping has
made no secret of the fact that by 2049
he wants China to be the number one
military
economic
political and perhaps even cultural
power in the world. And the question of
how the United States is going to deal
with the rise of essentially a peer
competitor the only country that can
deal with us across the board in those
areas
is the fundamental question.
>> Mhm.
>> And you're seeing in summits like this
that this plays out in arguments about
all kinds of specific issues.
But the overall question
is how do you deal with a country that's
trying to displace you as the world's
number one power?
>> What are some of those issues, David?
Walk us through those.
>> We'll start with nuclear weapons.
China had under Mao and for many decades
after a minimum nuclear deterrent. It
kept 100-200 nuclear weapons, just
enough to deter others from striking it.
But when Xi came in
he almost immediately began a huge
build-up that the United States didn't
really become fully aware of
until years later.
And today, it has about 600 nuclear
weapons. But, the Pentagon estimates
that China will have about 1,000 nuclear
weapons by uh 2030, and will match the
US and Russia by about 2035.
And why is this critical? Because just a
few months ago, as we've discussed on
the daily before, the last remaining
arms control treaty between Russia and
the United States expired. And President
Trump, I think rightly, said, "It
doesn't make sense to negotiate a new
one unless China's part of that
agreement." And the Chinese, so far,
have said outright they have no interest
in arms control or even discussing it
until they have an arsenal the size of
ours, that they wouldn't put themselves
in that kind of disadvantageous
negotiating position. So, President
Trump said to us in January, in our
lengthy interview with him, that he
plans to bring up nuclear arms control
issues with President Xi.
I don't think it's going to get very
far. The Chinese just aren't ready to
discuss it.
What they are ready to discuss is Taiwan
and Taiwan's right to exist.
>> And what specifically about Taiwan do
you anticipate coming up in this
meeting?
>> Well, Xi Jinping would like to do
anything he can to show that the United
States is becoming more open to the
thought that China, over time, would
take over Taiwan.
He doesn't expect an invitation for them
to do so. What he's looking for are some
small wording changes that might make
the Taiwanese more doubtful that the US
would come to their aid.
>> Wording changes like
>> Well,
the simplest one that is described most
often is that American officials usually
say that they would not support Taiwan
declaring its own independence.
But what the Chinese want to do is move
that word to oppose.
Sounds like a small change. In fact,
it's got big diplomatic significance to
it because opposes means that we would
take a specific view that
the only true China is
the People's Republic and that we would
oppose any effort to go challenge that.
>> Right. The words themselves might seem
like not that big of a deal, but in
effect, they are huge deal
diplomatically.
>> Right. And we just don't know how this
is going to turn out. One of his aides
told reporters in a briefing over the
weekend that he expected no change in
the American position.
But that's only true if the president
doesn't freelance.
And of course, we know
he is bound to freelance.
>> Which I can imagine is exactly what
China's hoping for.
>> Yes, but what's really interesting is
that Taiwan is one of the few topics
that when you raise it with President
Trump
he refuses to get fully engaged.
>> It seems like there are a couple reasons
why you might think that Taiwan would be
higher up on the president's priority
list, so to speak. Like one thing we
haven't mentioned yet, of course, is the
technology, the chips that are related
to AI that Taiwan is a big producer of.
For that alone, you'd think that perhaps
the president would be very keen to
discuss Taiwan.
>> Or as he He
that the United States needs the output
of Taiwan Semiconductor Corporation, the
world's most advanced semiconductor
maker. Its facilities are overwhelmingly
in Taiwan. And of course, the AI chips
that are at the core of the artificial
intelligence revolution. Now, this could
play both ways. You could imagine Xi
Jinping saying, "You know, I know how to
deal with Donald Trump. I just guarantee
him that he's getting his chips if he
just doesn't care about the rest of the
island."
>> I think for myself, and probably for a
lot of other people, AI, perhaps more
than many of these other issues on the
table, feels really front of mind.
This technology, it feels like it is
racing out in front of our security,
maybe even our understanding of it. And
so, are we imagining that we will see
any kind of real action on this front
from these two leaders at the meeting
this week?
>> Well, usually we found that these
discussions between world leaders are
pretty limited and pretty superficial.
During the Biden administration, it took
months to negotiate a simple line or two
between the US and China in which the
two countries agreed never to allow
their nuclear weapons to be directed by
artificial intelligence programs. So,
seemed like a pretty basic thing. Let's
keep human beings running our nukes. But
the idea was to build on that and try to
get some common understandings about not
letting artificial intelligence make
life and death decisions when it comes
to autonomous weapons. And so, there's
sort of an understanding that we need a
new form of arms control, but that
everything that we did in the nuclear
age doesn't apply very well in the AI
age because it's not as if these are
specific weapons that you can easily
inspect or count or keep control of. So,
these would largely be codes of conduct
and very hard to enforce.
And it'll be interesting to see if the
two leaders even touch on this topic or
or even willing to send their aids off
to discuss it.
>> Obviously, both the US and China are in
this race to win the AI battle. And
maybe because of that, they don't want
to do anything that would restrict their
growth.
But David, doesn't it feel like they
each have at least some kind of vested
interest in putting some kind of
guardrails around the other one?
>> You would think that would be pretty
obvious to both countries that they do
need guardrails, but you'll remember
that the Trump administration came into
power saying one country is going to win
this race and it's going to be whichever
country allows industry to do its thing
unfettered. We're not going to bog down
the industry with a lot of rules early
on.
That attitude has changed just in recent
weeks. And what's changed it has been
the arrival of Mythos, this Anthropic
[clears throat]
version of its main artificial
intelligence product, which it declined
to release to the public because it is
so effective at conducting offensive
cyber attacks. It can search out and
find almost instantly vulnerabilities in
the code of utility grids or other
infrastructure
and then order up an attack. Now, it can
also be useful for defending that
infrastructure. The Chinese are worried
about Mythos themselves, but presumably
they are working on very similar kinds
of large language models and it's
probably only 6 months, 8 months, maybe
a year away before they have a mythos of
their own.
That should deeply worry the
administration. And I think one of the
concerns that many American China
experts have right now is that the top
officials of the Trump administration
have been so distracted by what's
happened in the Middle East
that they're coming into this a bit
ill-prepared.
>> Well, let's talk about that. How does
the war in Iran fit into all of this?
>> This is not the conditions for the
summit that President Trump envisioned.
When he put off this meeting by about 6
weeks, he assumed that by that time the
war would be over, the Iranians would
have capitulated, and the Strait of
Hormuz would be open.
None of those three things are the case.
>> So, are you saying that you think the
war is likely to maybe take up more
oxygen than some of the other super
pressing topics that you've described to
us like nuclear weapons, AI, etc.?
>> I think we're going to see or maybe hear
about second-hand a lot of conversations
surrounding the reopening of the strait
and the ending of this conflict.
The Chinese clearly want to get the
strait opened without having to go
intervene themselves, and they probably
don't have the power to intervene very
much.
They get about 30% or more of their oil
and gas
moving through the Strait of Hormuz. So,
the Chinese have a huge economic
interest in getting this resolved
especially because their own economy
wasn't doing so wonderfully before the
war in Iran, and this increase in energy
prices is killing a lot of Chinese
enterprises.
But for the Chinese, it's a little more
complicated than just that. President
Trump will undoubtedly ask them to stop
supplying target data and technology to
the Iranians. Technology the Iranians
need for their missiles, for their
interceptors,
and for generally pursuing a war.
The United States also wants China to
use its influence with Iran since it is
such a big purchaser of Iranian goods to
get the Iranians to open up the
straight.
And it'll be really interesting to see
whether President Xi, who is very
cautious, but has a strong interest in
seeing the war end,
might actually quietly intervene on the
US's behalf with Iran.
>> You know, David, you said at the
beginning of this conversation that
these summits are often about a
demonstration of strength back home.
And that at this summit in particular,
it does not seem like there's going to
be much headway made on some of the
thorniest and most urgent issues of our
time.
So, I wonder what you think will feel
like a win to both of these men at the
end of the day.
>> Well, I guess the question is what feels
like a win and what they can sell as a
win. For President Trump, I think it's
pretty clear.
He always wants to emerge from these
with a bunch of business deals and
announce that that was indeed his goal
out here as dealmaker-in-chief.
But as we discussed, that doesn't get at
some of the fundamental questions,
including whether the Chinese, after
Iran, view the United States as not
quite as invincible as perhaps some
leaders thought it may be.
>> [music]
>> For President Xi, it's something of a
longer game.
>> [music]
>> He isn't particularly interested in the
individual deals that come out if they
help grease the wheels of diplomacy,
that's fine.
But President Xi may want to demonstrate
that he in fact is running the more
stable power right now.
That it is not invading other countries
or following the law of the jungle as he
said the other day in that veiled swipe
[music] at President Trump.
And that over time the world will depend
on Chinese power, [music]
Chinese capital
to rebuild and to establish new trading
relationships
>> [music]
>> around the world.
I think that's his long-term plan.
And I think he may doubt whether the
United States has a long-term plan of
its own.
>> [music]
[music]
>> David, thank you so much for making the
time and hope you have an easy trip.
>> Thank you, Rachel. It'll be interesting.
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
Dr. Manny McCary, the commissioner of
the Food and Drug Administration,
resigned on Tuesday after weeks of
pressure and rumors that President Trump
was planning to fire him.
Dr. McCary ultimately left over concerns
[music] about the administration's
decision to authorize fruit-flavored
e-cigarettes, which he opposed,
according to people familiar with the
matter.
And [music]
Kash Patel, the FBI director, sparred
with Senator Chris Van Hollen of
Maryland at a budget hearing over his
conduct, [music]
including whether he ordered polygraphs
of FBI employees to find leakers, and a
report that claimed that he drank
excessively in [music] a way that
affected his work.
Patel, who has denied the report about
excessive drinking and sued the
publication, accused Van Holland [music]
of drinking with Kilmar Arbrego Garcia,
an immigrant who the Trump
administration mistakenly sent to a
prison [music] in El Salvador.
Today's episode was [music] produced by
Jessica Chung, Shannon Lin, Adrian
Hurst, and Anna Foley.
It was edited by Devon Taylor [music]
with help from Page Cowett, and contains
music by Chelsea Daniel and Marion
Lozano.
Our theme music is [music] by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The [music] Daily. I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.
>> [music]